---
layout: home
---

Jesse Windle, Ph.D. is a [Data
Scientist](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jesse-windle-19802836).  He
specializes in using statistical models to extract insights from data
or to make predictions about future outcomes.  He also builds systems
for managing and interfacing with data.  (See his online resume
[here](/about/) or on
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jesse-windle-19802836).)

![](../about/jesse-windle-headshot-cropped-small.jpg){:style="width: 70%; display:block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto"}

As the first employee of [Hi Fidelity Technologies
](https://www.hifidelitytechnologies.com/), an agtech startup, he
helped build a company from the ground up --- inventing the
technology, assembling the early team, and then overseeing their data
engineering, device engineering, and data science teams as the company
grew.  He was responsible for producing and communicating results for
internal and external experiments.  Through the writing of grants, he
helped raise over $2
million in non-dilutive funding.  

Jesse received his Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Austin in
Computational and Applied Mathematics and was a Post Doctoral
Researcher and Visiting Assistant Professor in Statistics at Duke
University before joining [Hi Fidelity Technologies
](https://www.hifidelitytechnologies.com/).

You can learn more about Jesse [here](/about/) on
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jesse-windle-19802836).  Below
you will find some posts detailing some of Jesse's work.





