---
layout: post
author: Jesse Windle
title: Root system architecture impacts row crop emissions
---

At Hi Fidelity Technologies, our root phenotyping device (called
RootTracker) was used to interrogate many scientific questions, but
there was one question that intrigued us most of all: **do differences
in root system architecture lead to differences in greenhouse gas
emissions?**

Why is this plausible in the first place?  Let us consider maize.
Maize requires a large nitrogen application, often ammonium nitrate.
While it is possible to target the application of fertilizer to a
specific location, usually it is just sprayed onto the soil surface.
Some of that nitrogen will be absorbed by the plant, but a large
portion of it will not.  Ultimately, the unabsorbed fertilizer runs
into water or decomposes, giving off nitrous oxide (N2O) in the
process.  

Nitrous oxide is a major greenhouse gas.  It is the third largest
contributor after carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane, and is nearly 300
times more potent than CO2 ([IPCC] and [Wuebbles]). Row crop
agriculture is by far the largest source of anthropogenic N2O
emissions ([Reay et al.] and the [EPA]).

If one could identify cultivars with root system architecture that did
a better job acquiring fertilizer, then one could reduce N2O emissions.
The plants would be better and so would the environment.

And it is not only maize that is a major N2O emitter.  Soybean
production results in N2O emissions as well.  Together, soybean and
corn make up an enormous amount of US agriculture --- over 75% of
acres planted ([USDA]).  Clearly, finding cultivars with lower
emissions profiles could reduce N2O emissions in a major way.


# Experiment

The experiment took place in the summer of 2021 and 2022 near Ames,
IA.  I will only go into the results for 2021, since that year of work
was completely public- and self-funded and made use of proprietary
germplasm, but the results for 2022 aligned with the 2021 results.

We grew maize at one location using two proprietary hybrids (i.e. two
types of maize seed) --- HFG1071 and HFG1111.  There were four blocks,
one plot per variety within each block.  These four blocks tried to
capture variance across both previous crop as well as soil type.  Each
plot had 5 rows.  25 equally spaced RootTracker devices were placed on
plants within the plot.  I will use the terms rep and block
interchangeably here.

![](isu-n2o-field.jpg)

In the present post, I won't go into the details of how RootTracker
measures root growth, which can be found
[here](../../../2023/07/26/rootmodel.html).  The key thing is that
RootTracker measures the amount of root growth over time in terms of
the number of root touches per day (within a certain depth band).

Measuring N2O is tricky.  Traditionally and the way we did it in this
experiment, one puts a "collar" in each plot, which is just a wide,
short tube like a bit of 12" PVC.  To measure the N2O emissions, one
attaches a lid to the tube for a while, and then pulls out some gas,
which is sent to the lab for an assay.  (In our 2022 experiment, we
were actually able to use a laser to take instantaneous in-field
measurements.)  Part of the challenge is that N2O emissions are known
to be sporadic with certain events like rainfall leading to large
belches of N2O.  Further, emissions outside of the growing season may
matter as well.  In 2021, we were able to take roughly weekly
measurements in June and July.  


# Results

As mentioned previously, N2O emissions can be event driven.  For
instance, rainfall leads to big belches of N2O.  Conversely, when it
is dry for extended periods, there is likely very little emissions.
We saw this in 2021, when July was a very dry month and we recorded
minimal emissions.  For that reason, I will focus on June when there
was enough rainfall to produce non-trivial emissions data.

Below you will find the June, 2021 emissions vs. root growth.  The
"rate" of root growth is the number of detections divided by amount of
device uptime within a period of interest (in days).  We normalize by
time because the devices can have slightly different uptimes ---
e.g. a battery might need to be replaced, so a device does not collect
data for several hours.  For each rep and variety, I have computed a
trimmed mean (10% symmetric trim) of rates over all devices in a plot.

![](isu-n2o-results.jpg)

Two things immediately jump out:
1. On an absolute basis, there is an inverse relationship between the
   amount of emissions and amount of roots.  In other words, more
   roots correlates with less emissions, regardless of variety or
   block.
2. For 3/4 of the blocks, HFG1071 has more root growth and less
   emissions, so we also see this pattern on a relative basis.  And
   for the one block in which this does not occur, both hybrids have
   relatively low root growth.
   
We can quantify these differences.  Regarding the first point, after
running a linear regression we find that for every additional root
grown per day the monthly emissions are reduced by -0.083 kg/ha
(p=0.18).  If we remove the outlying point, then this becomes -0.067
kg/ha (p=0.049) --- a lower effect size, but with less uncertainty.
   
Regarding the second point, we want to understand if varietal
differences in root growth could be used to drive differences in
emissions.  Running a mixed model where variety is a fixed effect and
the rep is a random effect, we find that HFG1111 has 25% less root
growth compared to HFG1071 (-0.41 roots/day less compared to 1.68
roots/day for HFG1071, p=1e-5).  In other words, the two hybrid
varieties do seem to have noticeably different patterns of root growth
in this experiment.

Keep in mind that this is one month in one location in one year.  We
should be careful to draw conclusions from such a limited experiment.
As with yield, interactions with the environment can have a big impact
on results, and we have seen cultivar by environment interactions in
other experiments.  But the early evidence does lend itself to the
idea that root system architecture impacts emissions and that this
might be exploited to chose cultivars with lower greenhouse gas costs.
(Sadly, we had to shut our doors before we could adequately test this
hypothesis.)


# Conclusion

This is just one example of an analysis I would conduct at Hi Fidelity
Technologies.  We ran many experiments both for ourselves and for
clients.  Other questions we addressed include:

- How do root systems respond to drought, and how does that vary with
genetics?
- Do biostimulant seed treatments impact root growth, and is there an
  interaction with the environment?
- How does herbicide tolerance manifest itself in root growth?

Each experiment we ran demanded its own unique analysis, but there are
certain tools that are frequently used.  The linear model and variants
are ubiquitous: mixed models if there are random effects, quantile
regression if there are outliers or potentially an unusual
distribution of error terms, or spatial models when trying to capture
variations due to soil or other slowly varying environmental factors.

While I am not a partisan for any particular statistical philosophy,
one of the nice things about the Bayesian perspective is that it
easily encompasses all of these methods in one framework.  And one of
the major advantages of working with a linear model is that it
provides interpretable results.  The most important thing at the end
of the day is being able to capture a result in a narrative that is
easy to understand.


[IPCC]: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar4/wg1/changes-in-atmospheric-constituents-and-radiative-forcing/

[Wuebbles]: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1179571

[Reay et al.]: https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate1458

[EPA]: https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/inventory-us-greenhouse-gas-emissions-and-sinks-1990-2019

[USDA]: https://usda.library.cornell.edu/concern/publications/j098zb09z?locale=en
